Optimisation with vmec_jax
===========================

``vmec_jax`` supports end-to-end differentiable optimisation of MHD equilibria
through a discrete-adjoint Jacobian that is **exact** (no finite differences)
and runs entirely inside a single Python process.

This page covers:

- the mathematical approach and how it differs from SIMSOPT + VMEC2000,
- the key source files and public API,
- the algorithms (Gauss-Newton, line search, adjoint replay),
- how to reproduce the QA, QH, QP, and QI examples,
- figures comparing ``max_mode=1, 2, 3`` optimisation results and sweep
  policies.

Motivation: differentiability without finite differences
---------------------------------------------------------

SIMSOPT's canonical fixed-boundary QH workflow calls VMEC2000 as a black-box
subprocess and builds the Jacobian column by column using finite differences::

  # SIMSOPT / VMEC2000 approach
  for i in range(n_params):
      perturb boundary DOF i by ε
      run VMEC2000 subprocess            # one full solve per column
      J[:, i] = (f(x+ε·eᵢ) - f(x)) / ε

For ``n_params = 24`` boundary DOFs this is 24 extra forward solves per
Jacobian evaluation — expensive, and the result is only accurate to
``O(√ε_machine)`` due to finite-difference cancellation.

``vmec_jax`` uses a **discrete-adjoint replay** instead:

1. Run one "exact" forward solve with the adjoint flag, storing a
   compressed checkpoint tape of the iteration trajectory.
2. Propagate tangent vectors through the tape via batched JVP
   (``jax.vmap(jax.jvp(...))``, visiting each recorded iteration step
   in forward order exactly once per tangent batch.

The Jacobian is thereby computed to **machine precision** in a time roughly
equal to ``1 + fraction-of-solve × n_params`` forward-solve equivalents,
rather than ``n_params`` full forward solves.

In practice, for ``n_params ≤ 24`` the Jacobian build takes roughly 0.5–1.5×
the cost of a single tight solve — comparable to SIMSOPT + finite differences
with ``n_params = 1`` but covering the full parameter space at once.

→ See :doc:`discrete_adjoint` for a full mathematical description.


Comparison with SIMSOPT
------------------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 35 32 33

   * - Feature
     - vmec_jax
     - SIMSOPT + VMEC2000
   * - Jacobian method
     - Exact discrete-adjoint replay
     - Finite differences (columnar)
   * - Jacobian cost
     - ≈ 1.5 × forward solve
     - n_params × forward solve
   * - Subprocess required
     - No — pure Python/JAX
     - Yes — VMEC2000 Fortran binary
   * - Accuracy
     - Machine-precision (exact)
     - O(√ε\_machine) FD error
   * - GPU support
     - Yes (JAX device)
     - No
   * - Differentiable through optimizer
     - Yes (JAX autodiff)
     - No

Current wall times and objective values are generated by
``examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py`` and rendered in the policy
sweep below.  The docs avoid fixed one-off numbers in this comparison table so
that benchmark values do not drift from the generated CSV/JSON artifacts.

→ See :doc:`simsopt_comparison` for a detailed runtime, memory, and
algorithm comparison.


Quasi-helical symmetry example
--------------------------------

The ``examples/optimization/QH_optimization.py`` script replicates the
SIMSOPT QH benchmark entirely within ``vmec_jax``.  It has no
argparse — all parameters are top-level variables, and the objective is built
explicitly as a small list.  After the objective definition, the script shows
the same setup-and-solve flow used by the QA/QP/QI examples:

.. code-block:: python

   INPUT_FILE = DATA_DIR / "input.nfp4_QH_warm_start"
   MAX_MODE = 3
   MIN_VMEC_MODE = 6
   MAX_NFEV = 30
   METHOD = "scipy"            # also: "gauss_newton", "scipy_matrix_free", "lbfgs_adjoint"
   SCIPY_TR_SOLVER = "lsmr"    # also: "exact" for small dense trust-region solves
   SOLVER_DEVICE = None        # set to "cpu" or "gpu" to force one backend
   HELICITY_M = 1
   HELICITY_N = -1
   TARGET_ASPECT = 5.0
   TARGET_ABS_IOTA_MIN = 0.41
   SURFACES = np.arange(0.0, 1.01, 0.1)

   vmec = vj.FixedBoundaryVMEC.from_input(
       INPUT_FILE,
       max_mode=MAX_MODE,
       min_vmec_mode=MIN_VMEC_MODE,
       output_dir=OUTPUT_DIR,
   )
   stage_modes = qs_stage_modes(
       max_mode=MAX_MODE,
       use_mode_continuation=USE_MODE_CONTINUATION,
       continuation_nfev=CONTINUATION_NFEV,
   )

   aspect = vj.AspectRatio()
   iota_floor = vj.AbsMeanIotaFloor(TARGET_ABS_IOTA_MIN)
   qs = vj.QuasisymmetryRatioResidual(
       helicity_m=HELICITY_M,
       helicity_n=HELICITY_N,
       surfaces=SURFACES,
   )
   problem = vj.LeastSquaresProblem.from_tuples(
       [
           (aspect.J, TARGET_ASPECT, ASPECT_WEIGHT),
           (iota_floor.J, 0.0, IOTA_WEIGHT),
           (qs.J, 0.0, QS_WEIGHT),
           # Optional physics terms:
           # (vj.LgradB(threshold=0.30, smooth_penalty=1.0e-3).J, 0.0, 0.01),
           # (vj.MagneticWell(minimum=0.0).J, 0.0, 1.0),
           # (vj.VolavgB().J, TARGET_VOLAVGB, VOLAVGB_WEIGHT),
           # (vj.BetaTotal().J, TARGET_BETA, BETA_WEIGHT),
           # DMerc is currently a wout diagnostic/parity gate; a differentiable
           # DMerc objective should be added before using it in this adjoint path.
       ]
   )

   result = vj.least_squares_solve(
       vmec,
       problem,
       stage_modes=stage_modes,
       max_nfev=MAX_NFEV,
       continuation_nfev=CONTINUATION_NFEV,
       method=METHOD,
       ftol=FTOL,
       gtol=GTOL,
       xtol=XTOL,
       use_ess=USE_ESS,
       ess_alpha=ALPHA,
       label=LABEL,
       use_mode_continuation=USE_MODE_CONTINUATION,
       inner_max_iter=INNER_MAX_ITER,
       inner_ftol=INNER_FTOL,
       trial_max_iter=TRIAL_MAX_ITER,
       trial_ftol=TRIAL_FTOL,
       solver_device=SOLVER_DEVICE,
       scipy_tr_solver=SCIPY_TR_SOLVER,
   )

   history = result.final_result["_history_dump"]
   print(f"Final aspect ratio:    {history['aspect_final']:.6g}")
   print(f"Final mean iota:       {history['iota_final']:.6g}")
   print(f"Final field objective: {history['qs_final']:.6e}")

   wout_final = vj.load_wout(OUTPUT_DIR / "wout_final.nc")
   theta, zeta, b_lcfs = vj.vmecplot2_bmag_grid(
       wout_final,
       s_index=-1,
       ntheta=64,
       nzeta=64,
       zeta_max=2.0 * np.pi / float(wout_final.nfp),
   )
   print(f"LCFS |B| grid shape: {b_lcfs.shape}, Bmax={np.max(b_lcfs):.6g}")

   plot_paths = {
       "boundary_comparison": vj.plot_3d_boundary_comparison(
           OUTPUT_DIR / "wout_initial.nc",
           OUTPUT_DIR / "wout_final.nc",
           outdir=OUTPUT_DIR,
       ),
       "bmag_contours": vj.plot_bmag_contours(
           OUTPUT_DIR / "wout_initial.nc",
           OUTPUT_DIR / "wout_final.nc",
           outdir=OUTPUT_DIR,
       ),
       "objective_history": vj.plot_objective_history(
           OUTPUT_DIR / "history.json",
           outdir=OUTPUT_DIR,
       ),
   }
   print(plot_paths)

Objective callbacks receive ``(ctx, state)`` and may return a scalar or vector.
The tuple weight follows SIMSOPT semantics: vmec_jax minimizes
``sqrt(weight) * (J - target)``.  Problem-specific targets and QI sampling
options live on the objective objects/problem, while ``least_squares_solve``
only receives optimizer, continuation, device, and output controls.

Run it with:

.. code-block:: bash

   python examples/optimization/QH_optimization.py


Standalone QA/QH/QP/QI scripts
------------------------------

The individual scripts are workflow examples, not the canonical benchmark
tables.  They intentionally expose all important controls as top-level
variables, so users can edit the file exactly as in the SIMSOPT examples:
VMEC resolution, active boundary modes, objective terms, weights, ESS scaling,
continuation policy, and optimizer options.

.. code-block:: bash

   python examples/optimization/QA_optimization.py
   python examples/optimization/QH_optimization.py
   python examples/optimization/QP_optimization.py
   python examples/optimization/QI_optimization.py

Those scripts write ``input.initial``, ``input.final``, ``wout_initial.nc``,
``wout_final.nc``, ``history.json``, and per-case diagnostic plots.  Current
published optimization numbers, wall times, objective histories, final 3-D
surfaces, and LCFS :math:`|B|` contours come only from the generated sweep
artifacts below.  This avoids drifting documentation when a one-off example is
rerun with different local budgets.


Full QA/QH/QP/QI policy sweep
-----------------------------

The sweep below compares four target objectives:

- QA: the reference omnigenity NFP=2 QA deck, aspect ratio near 5,
  signed mean iota target 0.42, and quasi-axisymmetry.
- QH: the bundled NFP=4 warm start, aspect ratio near 5, quasi-helical
  symmetry, and a smooth ``abs(mean_iota) >= 0.41`` lower bound.
- QP: aspect ratio near 5, quasi-poloidal symmetry, and a smooth
  ``abs(mean_iota) >= 0.41`` lower bound, using the same bundled NFP=2 seed as
  the QI runs.
- QI: aspect ratio near 5, a differentiable smooth Boozer-space quasi-isodynamic
  residual evaluated through ``booz_xform_jax``, maximum mirror-ratio penalty,
  maximum-LCFS-elongation penalty, and the same smooth
  ``abs(mean_iota) >= 0.41`` lower bound.  ``LgradB`` is available as an
  optional commented term in the example scripts.

The current objective priority is primary symmetry/QI quality and rotational
transform control first.  All four default targets use aspect ratio near 5;
QA also uses the signed iota-0.42 target, while QH/QP/QI use
``abs(mean_iota) >= 0.41``.  ``LgradB`` remains available for users who want
extra magnetic-gradient regularization, but it is not active in the default
sweeps or best-row selection.  When enabling ``LgradB`` in an adjoint
optimization, use a small ``smooth_penalty`` so the softplus penalty remains
differentiable near the threshold.

Each problem is run with staged mode continuation and with direct-start mode
expansion.  Each policy is run with and without ESS using ``alpha = 1.2``,
matching the gentler scaling used by the local omnigenity optimization
workflows.
For QI, the focused constrained sweep additionally compares starting from a
same-mode QP preseed against starting directly from the bundled
``input.nfp2_QI`` omnigenity seed.  This QP preseed is useful as a controlled
warm start, but its scalar objective is different from the QI refinement
objective and is therefore not stitched into the plotted QI history.  The CLI
default is ``--qi-qp-preseed off``; use ``--qi-qp-preseed on`` or
``--qi-qp-preseed both`` to run the QP-preseed diagnostic rows.
That NFP=2 seed contains mode-2 boundary harmonics, so QI stages first project
the input boundary to the requested active space:
``max(abs(m), abs(n)) <= max_mode``.  Thus a ``max_mode=1`` QI run explicitly
zeros the mode-2 seed before solving, while ``max_mode=2`` and ``max_mode=3``
retain and optimize the corresponding larger active spaces.
When enabled, the QP preseed is followed by a final refinement with the full
QI + mirror-ratio + elongation objective.  ``LgradB`` remains an optional
commented objective term in the scripts, but it is not active in the default
sweeps.  The previous QI-only
preseed and profile-locking penalty are disabled by default because the local
reference QI workflow optimizes bounce/well-width label dependence directly,
plus mirror, elongation, and magnetic-gradient scale-length penalties, rather
than forcing a prescribed Boozer ``|B|`` profile.
This keeps QP as an explicit optional experiment while still measuring whether
the preseed helps or hurts the constrained QI solve.
``QI_OPTIONS.phimin`` selects the beginning of the one-field-period well
interval used by the smooth QI residual.  The bundled NFP=2 seed uses the
default ``0.0``; set it to ``np.pi / nfp`` when comparing against a reference
configuration whose well starts one half-period later.
Columns correspond to ``max_mode = 1, 2, 3``.  The vertical dotted lines mark
continuation stage boundaries.  QA/QH/QP continuation uses the repeated
omnigenity-style policy ``[1, 1, 2, 2, 2]`` for ``max_mode=2`` and
``[1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3]`` for ``max_mode=3``.  QI repeats the requested
active space five times, matching the reference omnigenity workflow.

The generated objective panels contain the full CPU/GPU policy sweep.  Solid
curves met the optimizer success criterion; dashed curves are stopped, failed,
or budgeted lanes.  The summary tables identify whether a dashed lane reached
``max_nfev``, hit the 1200 second timeout, or failed earlier such as from GPU
OOM.  Curves are split by objective stage and plotted as best-so-far values
within that stage, so QP preseed and full constrained QI refinement are not
treated as one continuous scalar objective.  The QA input follows the
omnigenity ``input.nfp22_QA`` deck and carries nonzero mode-1 boundary terms so
the iota residual has a useful derivative.  Direct QA without ESS remains a
weak policy for high direct-start modes; staged continuation is the default
research-grade policy for QA.

The large all-policy panels, atlases, and PDF snapshots are generated assets,
not source files.  They are intentionally not tracked in git.  Recreate them
from the sweep results with the commands below; the README keeps only the four
compact best-result PNGs.

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy continuation --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy direct --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy continuation --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy direct --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/render_qs_ess_publication_panel.py

Run the constrained QI preseed/no-preseed matrix explicitly with:

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy continuation --problems qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy direct --problems qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/render_qi_constrained_sweep.py

The default per-case timeout is ``1200 s``.  The current omnigenity-style
science configs use ``inner_max_iter = trial_max_iter = 120`` and
``ftol = trial_ftol = 1e-9``.  GPU production sweeps cap those values at 180
if a future config requests a larger replay budget, so high-mode/LASYM cases
are bounded without silently switching to diagnostic budgets.  Add
``--diagnostic-budgets`` only for bounded quick-look GPU diagnostics, and use
``--case-timeout-s 0`` only for an unbounded local diagnostic run.

To recreate one row, restrict ``--policy`` and ``--problems``.  For example,
this reruns the current README-best QA row:

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy continuation --problems qa --modes 3 --ess off --rerun
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/render_qs_ess_publication_panel.py

The GPU rows run through the same exact/replay path as CPU with GPU-calibrated
optimizer budgets.  If you need a short diagnostic matrix, append
``--diagnostic-budgets``; otherwise the script uses calibrated production
budgets and records any non-converged case as a normal ``max_nfev`` stop.

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy continuation --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy direct --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/render_qs_ess_publication_panel.py

Non-Stellarator-Symmetric Sweeps
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Append ``--stellarator-asymmetric`` to set ``LASYM = T`` in the in-memory VMEC
input and optimize ``RBC/ZBS/RBS/ZBC`` instead of only the stellarator-symmetric
``RBC/ZBS`` families.  The sweep deterministically seeds zero asymmetric
``RBS/ZBC`` degrees of freedom with ``1e-7`` so exact Jacobians do not start
from a completely inactive asymmetric subspace.  Results are written under
``results/qs_ess_sweep/<backend>/asymmetric/`` and the renderer creates
additional ``*_asymmetric_*`` objective panels, state atlases, summary tables,
and full publication panels when those cases are present.

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy continuation --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both --stellarator-asymmetric
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORMS=cpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label cpu --solver-device cpu --policy direct --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both --stellarator-asymmetric
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy continuation --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both --stellarator-asymmetric
   PYTHONPATH=. JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu python examples/optimization/generate_qs_ess_sweep.py --backend-label gpu --solver-device gpu --policy direct --problems qa,qh,qp,qi --modes 1,2,3 --ess both --qi-qp-preseed both --stellarator-asymmetric
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/render_qs_ess_publication_panel.py

The published LASYM figures are partial 1200 second lanes rather than a
complete matrix.  This is intentional: timeout and GPU-memory failures are
useful performance data for the asymmetric exact/replay path.  The current
frozen snapshot contains 13 CPU LASYM rows and 61 GPU LASYM rows.  The CPU
subset has 6 successful rows, 6 crashed rows, and 1 budgeted stop; the GPU
subset has 19 successful rows, 10 crashed rows, and 32 budgeted stops.

For NVIDIA-only JAX installations, ``JAX_PLATFORMS=cuda`` is also valid.  Do
not use ``JAX_PLATFORMS=gpu``: some JAX versions interpret that as both CUDA
and ROCm and fail if ROCm is not installed.

The renderer writes these report artifacts under
``examples/optimization/results/qs_ess_sweep``.  Copy only the small README
figures into ``docs/_static/figures`` before committing.  Leave the large
publication panels, state atlases, summary-table images, and PDFs as generated
local artifacts or attach them to a GitHub release.

Final equilibria for CPU/GPU continuation/direct cases are rendered separately
so the 3D surfaces and boundary-field colorbars remain readable.  The
``|B|`` panels use line contours on the LCFS, not filled contours.  The
renderer emits ``final_state_atlas_*.png/.pdf`` files locally for reports; they
are excluded from git so a fresh clone stays lightweight.


Finite-beta stage-one examples
------------------------------

The finite-beta examples reproduce the VMEC-only stage-one part of the
``single_stage_optimization_finite_beta`` workflows without SIMSOPT or coils.
They use the finite-pressure/current input decks in ``examples/data`` and add
JAX-differentiable global residuals for aspect ratio, iota bounds,
volume-averaged field proxy, and total beta.  QA and QH then add the usual
quasisymmetry residual; QI adds the smooth Boozer-space quasi-isodynamic
residual through ``booz_xform_jax``.

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/qa_optimization_finite_beta.py
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/qh_optimization_finite_beta.py
   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/qi_optimization_finite_beta.py

All controls are top-level variables in those scripts: ``MAX_MODE``,
``MAX_NFEV``, ``USE_ESS``, ``USE_MODE_CONTINUATION``, and
``SOLVER_DEVICE``.  The scripts also expose ``INNER_MAX_ITER``,
``INNER_FTOL``, ``TRIAL_MAX_ITER``, and ``TRIAL_FTOL`` so deck-controlled
VMEC budgets can be kept or overridden explicitly.  Set
``SOLVER_DEVICE = "gpu"`` or run with ``JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu`` on a machine
with a working JAX GPU install.

The QI finite-beta script additionally exposes ``QI_MBOZ``, ``QI_NBOZ``,
``QI_NPHI``, ``QI_NALPHA``, and ``QI_N_BOUNCE``.  Its defaults are intended as
diagnostic first-run settings; increase these grid controls before treating a
QI finite-beta refinement as a final research-quality result.

The current implementation includes differentiable finite-beta global
diagnostics and current-driven iota through ``PCURR_TYPE = "cubic_spline_ip"``.
The full Redl bootstrap-current mismatch and Mercier ``DMerc`` residuals from
the SIMSOPT finite-beta script remain open extensions; the examples keep the
stage-one structure and write VMEC inputs/wouts/history so those terms can be
added and regression-tested incrementally.

The full multi-page artifact inventory, including legacy aliases, CSV/JSON
summary downloads, and exact reproduction commands for each standalone example,
is collected in :doc:`optimization_sweep_results`.


QI objective tuning
-------------------

The current standalone ``QI_optimization.py`` defaults encode the best
public-API QI lane from the parameter study:

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/QI_optimization.py

The study compared direct versus repeated-stage continuation, QP pre-seeding,
aspect-ratio weights, mirror/elongation soft-wall weights, QI branch-width
weights, the branch-shuffle profile residual, and termination tolerances against the nfp=2
``examples/data/input.nfp2_QI`` seed.  The robust lane is repeated same-mode
continuation at ``max_mode = 3`` with ESS, ``target_aspect = 5.0``,
``abs(mean_iota) >= 0.41``, ``branch_width_weight = 0.5``,
``profile_weight = 0.1``, ``shuffle_profile_weight = 1.0``, and a tighter
``XTOL = 1e-8``.  The
shuffle-profile term is intentionally retained because width-only and
branch-width-only smooth surrogates can rank QH/QP-like false positives ahead
of the branch-squash/stretch/shuffle diagnostic used in the reference Goodman
et al. omnigenity workflow.

Two practical lessons from that study are now reflected in the example:

- ``least_squares_solve`` uses SIMSOPT tuple semantics, so tuple weights are
  ``sqrt(weight)`` residual multipliers.  Mirror/elongation soft-wall weights
  should be strong enough to prevent pathological shapes but not so dominant
  that they block the lower-QI basin.
- The QI branch-width and shuffle-profile terms smooth the well matching
  enough to avoid the noisy objective jumps seen in earlier direct QI attempts,
  while preserving the same design ranking as the legacy branch diagnostic on
  the seed, the reference omnigenity result, and recent vmec_jax candidates.
  LgradB remains available as a commented optional shaping term, but it is not
  part of the default best QI lane.


Algorithms in detail
---------------------

Least-squares drivers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``vmec_jax`` provides two standalone outer least-squares drivers:

- :func:`~vmec_jax.gauss_newton_least_squares`, a concrete custom
  Gauss-Newton loop tuned for exact VMEC callbacks;
- ``method="scipy"`` in :class:`~vmec_jax.FixedBoundaryExactOptimizer.run`,
  which uses ``scipy.optimize.least_squares`` with the same exact residual and
  discrete-adjoint Jacobian callbacks.

The QA fixed-resolution example currently uses the SciPy route because it is
more robust on the higher-dimensional QA problem. The custom Gauss-Newton path
is still available for lower-level experiments and tighter callback control.

Discrete-adjoint Jacobian
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Jacobian column ``∂r/∂pᵢ`` is computed by propagating the initial-state
tangent ``∂state₀/∂pᵢ`` through all recorded iteration steps:

.. code-block:: text

   params → boundary → state₀   (linearize via jax.linearize)
   state₀ → state₁ → ... → stateₙ  (forward scan, checkpointed)
   stateₙ → residuals            (linearize via jax.linearize)

The tangent propagation through the iterates is done by
:func:`~vmec_jax.checkpoint_tape_state_jvp_columns`, which:

1. Loads the checkpoint tape (packed state at each step, preconditioner, etc.).
2. Calls ``jax.vmap(jax.jvp(step_fn, ...))`` over all parameter tangents at
   once, reusing the same compiled scan kernel.

Key implementation choices:

- **``backtracking=False, strict_update=True``**: matches the VMEC2000 iteration
  path.  Using ``backtracking=True`` collapses the step size to machine epsilon
  on QH geometry and kills convergence.
- **``VMEC_JAX_DYNAMIC_REPLAY_BUCKET``**: pads nearby solve trajectories so the
  same XLA scan executable is reused across Jacobian evaluations with slightly
  different tape lengths.  The default is ``32``; larger values are profiling
  controls, not a universal GPU speedup.
- **Single-entry cache** (``_exact_cache``): stores the last tape by parameter
  hash.  Avoids rebuilding the tape when ``residual_fun`` then ``jacobian_fun``
  are called at the same ``x`` (which Gauss-Newton always does).

Residuals function
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:func:`~vmec_jax.make_qh_residuals_fn` builds the combined QH + aspect-ratio
residual vector:

.. code-block:: python

   r[0]    = aspect_weight * (aspect - target_aspect)
   r[1:]   = qs_weight * quasisymmetry_ratio_residuals(state, surfaces, m=1, n=-1)
   # n is in field-period units: n=-1 → QH with nn=-nfp internally (nfp=4 → nn=-4)

The quasisymmetry ratio residual is computed by
:func:`~vmec_jax.quasisymmetry_ratio_residual_from_state`, which evaluates
:math:`|B|` on the specified surfaces, decomposes it into helical modes, and
returns the residuals of the off-helicity modes.


Public API
----------

.. currentmodule:: vmec_jax

:class:`FixedBoundaryExactOptimizer`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The main entry point for differentiable fixed-boundary optimisation.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Method
     - Description
   * - ``__init__(static, indata, boundary, specs, residuals_fn)``
     - Construct optimizer; derive solver settings from indata.
   * - ``run(params0, *, max_nfev, ftol, gtol, xtol, x_scale)``
     - Run Gauss-Newton loop; returns SciPy-like result dict.
   * - ``save_wout(path, params)``
     - Write a ``wout_*.nc`` for the equilibrium at ``params``.
   * - ``save_history(path, result)``
     - Write per-iteration history to JSON.
   * - ``aspect_ratio(params)``
     - Query aspect ratio (uses exact-solve cache).
   * - ``quasisymmetry_objective(params)``
     - Query total QS objective (uses exact-solve cache).
   * - ``clear_caches()``
     - Release JIT and tape caches.

:func:`make_qh_residuals_fn`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Factory returning a ``residuals_from_state(VMECState) → jnp.ndarray`` callable
configured for quasi-helical symmetry.  Combines one aspect-ratio residual with
per-surface QS residuals.

Parameters: ``static``, ``indata``, ``helicity_m``, ``helicity_n``,
``target_aspect``, ``surfaces``, ``aspect_weight``, ``qs_weight``.

:func:`make_qs_residuals_fn`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

General quasisymmetry residuals factory supporting QA (``helicity_n=0``),
QH, and optional mean-iota targets.  Preferred for new workflows.

Parameters: ``static``, ``indata``, ``helicity_m``, ``helicity_n``,
``target_aspect``, ``target_iota``, ``surfaces``,
``aspect_weight``, ``iota_weight``, ``qs_weight``.

:func:`create_x_scale`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Build per-DOF exponential spectral scaling weights for use with
:meth:`FixedBoundaryExactOptimizer.run`.

.. math::

   w_i = \exp(-\alpha \cdot \max(|m_i|, |n_i|)) \;/\; \exp(-\alpha)

The lowest non-trivial mode level (``max(|m|,|n|)=1``) has weight 1; higher
modes are progressively down-weighted.  Use ``alpha=0`` for uniform weights.

Parameters: ``specs``, ``alpha`` (default 1.0).

:func:`gauss_newton_least_squares`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Bare Gauss-Newton solver with exact Jacobian, Armijo line search, and hooks for
expensive outer loops.  See ``vmec_jax/optimization.py`` for full signature.

:func:`plot_3d_boundary_comparison`, :func:`plot_bmag_contours`, :func:`plot_objective_history`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generate the standard optimization figures independently, so user scripts can
choose only the plots they need:

- ``boundary_comparison.png`` — 3-D LCFS coloured by :math:`|B|`.
- ``bmag_surface.png`` — :math:`|B|` contour lines on LCFS (θ, φ/nfp).
- ``objective_history.png`` — Objective and aspect ratio vs Jacobian index.

:func:`checkpoint_tape_state_jvp_columns`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Low-level function for propagating a batch of tangents through the adjoint
tape.  Returns final-state tangents (one per parameter).  Used internally by
:class:`FixedBoundaryExactOptimizer` but exposed publicly for custom workflows.

Source files
-------------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 45 55

   * - File
     - Role
   * - ``vmec_jax/optimization.py``
     - :class:`FixedBoundaryExactOptimizer`, :func:`make_qh_residuals_fn`,
       :func:`make_qs_residuals_fn`, :func:`create_x_scale`,
       :func:`gauss_newton_least_squares`, boundary DOF helpers.
   * - ``vmec_jax/discrete_adjoint.py``
     - Checkpoint tape build (``build_residual_checkpoint_tape_direct``),
       JVP propagation (``checkpoint_tape_state_jvp_columns``).
   * - ``vmec_jax/quasisymmetry.py``
     - QS residuals (``quasisymmetry_ratio_residual_from_state``).
   * - ``vmec_jax/quasi_isodynamic.py``
     - Differentiable smooth Boozer-space QI residuals
       (``quasi_isodynamic_residual_from_state``), mirror-ratio penalty, and
       LCFS elongation and ``LgradB`` penalties.
   * - ``vmec_jax/plotting.py``
     - ``plot_3d_boundary_comparison``, ``plot_bmag_contours``,
       and ``plot_objective_history``.
   * - ``vmec_jax/driver.py``
     - ``write_wout_from_fixed_boundary_run``, ``wout_from_fixed_boundary_run``.
   * - ``examples/optimization/QH_optimization.py``
     - QH SIMSOPT-style workflow script (no argparse, variables and objective list at top).
   * - ``examples/optimization/QA_optimization.py``
     - QA workflow with ESS toggle (aspect + mean iota + QA objectives).
   * - ``examples/optimization/QP_optimization.py``
     - QP workflow with helicity ``M=0`` quasisymmetry and iota lower bound.
   * - ``vmec_jax/optimization_workflow.py``
     - Shared mechanics for objective terms, stage construction, continuation,
       output writing, and plotting while keeping the QA/QH/QP scripts linear.
   * - ``examples/optimization/QI_optimization.py``
     - QI workflow using ``booz_xform_jax``, a bundled omnigenity seed,
       and explicit mirror-ratio/elongation/``LgradB``
       objective blocks that users can extend in the script.
   * - ``examples/optimization/compare_omnigenity_qi_objective.py``
     - Diagnostic QI objective comparison against the local
       ``omnigenity_optimization`` reference scripts, including ``phimin``
       interval scans and residual-block timings.
   * - ``examples/optimization/plot_optimization_results.py``
     - Standalone plotting helper (regenerates figures from saved wout+JSON).
   * - ``examples/optimization/target_iota_aspect_volume.py``
     - Simpler optimisation targeting iota, aspect, volume.

Running the QH example
-----------------------

.. code-block:: bash

   # Run optimisation (saves wout files + history.json + figures to results/qh_opt)
   python examples/optimization/QH_optimization.py

   # Regenerate figures from saved outputs
   python examples/optimization/plot_optimization_results.py --output-dir results/qh_opt

Increase ``MAX_MODE`` at the top of ``QH_optimization.py`` for richer
boundary parameterisation; increase ``MAX_NFEV`` for more optimisation budget.

Running the QI objective comparison
------------------------------------

.. code-block:: bash

   PYTHONPATH=. python examples/optimization/compare_omnigenity_qi_objective.py

This script is intentionally diagnostic. It writes JSON and ``wout`` artifacts
under ``results/omnigenity_compare/qi_objective`` and should be used before
changing the smooth QI objective weights, especially
``shuffle_profile_weight``, or the ``phimin`` well interval.  The
local SIMSOPT/``omnigenity_optimization`` reference leg is off by default to
avoid expensive accidental runs; set ``RUN_REFERENCE_OMNIGENITY = True`` in the
script when an apples-to-apples reference residual is needed.  The reference
leg runs in a child process with ``REFERENCE_TIMEOUT_S`` so crashes, memory
pressure, or timeouts are reported in the JSON summary without killing the
vmec_jax diagnostic.


GPU acceleration
-----------------

The same workflow runs on GPU without modification.  After installing
GPU-enabled JAX, leave JAX's default platform selection active or set
``JAX_PLATFORM_NAME=gpu`` before running.  For NVIDIA CUDA specifically,
``JAX_PLATFORMS=cuda`` is also valid.  You can also pass
``solver_device="gpu"`` to the Python optimizer/driver interfaces.  If
``solver_device`` is unset, vmec_jax inherits JAX's active default backend.

For GPU runs, the dynamic replay bucket
(``VMEC_JAX_DYNAMIC_REPLAY_BUCKET``) should be tuned only during profiling.
The default keeps padding modest.  Coarser buckets can reduce recompilation in
some trajectories, but they can also make accepted-point replay much slower.


Further reading
---------------

.. seealso::

   * :doc:`discrete_adjoint`
   * :doc:`simsopt_comparison`
